# First Essay

Cricket is by far the most popular sport in India today; over 300 million Indian people watched the 2023 World Cup final. This modern popularity can, in part, be explained by the deep cultural and historical roots of cricket in India. ‘Bat and Ball’ was brought to India by British soldiers and sailors in the 18th century, who used to sneer at the native's makeshift cricket bats and stumps. However, the British were soon embarrassed when the skills of the Indian cricketers quickly outshone their own, and in the early 20th century, the Indian several formidable Indian cricket teams had formed. Shortly after—as so often happens in sports—the game came to represent something much greater than just a competitive leisure activity. Battles within the creases represented the wider social and political conflicts between social groups and colonial power. In light of the sociopolitical importance of Cricket during this time, I am particularly puzzled that most academic historians have not explored the views of Mahatma Gandhi regarding cricket, given that he was arguably the most important Indian political figure during the 20th century. I wish to show the complicated relationship Gandhi had with cricket and dispel the myth that the Mahatma did not consider the power of the batter’s swing outside of the green.

The story of legendary cricketer Palwankar Baloo and his brothers illustrates how, in the beginning, cricket served Gandhi’s wider social aims. Baloo was the first prominent cricketer in Western India to emerge from the Dalit community. At the time, there was extreme prejudice across India to those who were members of the Dalit community, as they were considered a part of the lowest social tier within the caste system. This prejudice was so extreme that colloquially, they were labelled ‘untouchables’ as they were perceived as uncleanly, which further reinforced their place at the bottom of the social ladder as hygiene was considered a symbol of status. Despite this hostile atmosphere, through his extraordinary skill, Baloo rose to the highest level of Indian cricket, playing for the Hindu team in the prestigious and popular cricket competition known as the Quadrangular throughout the 1910s and 20s. Notwithstanding this breakthrough, prejudice endured; Baloo was forbidden to dine with his teammates during the tea break of a cricket match and was not made the captain despite his proficiency. As Gandhi’s movement against untouchability—a condition that was critical for Indian independence—began to gain traction in the 1920s, something had to give on the pitch. In 1923, Baloo’s younger brother, Vithal, became captain of the Hindu team and led them to the famed victory over the Europeans in the Quadratangular tournament. The image of captain Vithal—someone from the lowest strata of the social order—being carried and cheered on by his teammates of higher classes was a physical representation of the reversal of the caste system. This significance was not lost on Vithal’s supporters, who regarded this as a key illustration that 'that the removal of Untouchability would lead to Swaraj (Indian independence).’ This demonstrates the political and social significance of the cricket pitch and the power it had to challenge social norms. Moreover, the symbolic reversal of the caste system was important for Gandhi as it supported one of his key beliefs that would bring Swaraj. Though he did not officially comment on this event, it is likely he heard of it and recognised the political and social power of cricket. In fact, as I will show, his open criticism of cricket when it did not align with his goals communicates that Gandhi was well aware of what was going on in the gentleman’s game.

Gandhi’s open criticism of the teams that were formed on ‘communal lines’ during the 1940s demonstrates his acute awareness of the sport. It is important to recognise that at this time, the majority of cricket teams were made up of people from the same background and religion. In practice, this meant there was a separate team for Hindu, Parsi and Muslim teams. Though this was not the only way people competed, in the major tournaments such as the Quadrangular, this was the case. Gandhi considered these divisions to be ‘unsportsmanlike’, and he further wished that this type of language emphasising communal division ‘would be considered taboos in sporting language and sporting manners.’ This statement sparked the creation of the  Anti-Pentangular Committee, which was formed in Bombay and urged the public to boycott the cricket. They stated that 'when the greatest living Indian has condemned communal sports, if we cannot keep away from the Pentangular for one fortnight’ and could be seen outside the games with banners urging people not to attend the matches. This statement by Gandhi and the wider boycotting of cricket was directly influenced by Gandhi’s anxiety at the time that India would gain independence but not as a united country, but rather one fragmented along religious lines. He considered the competitive and potentially destructive rivalry that emerged from cricket as detrimental to the unity of the country. This indicates that Gandhi regarded cricket as important for social relations and the political future of the country, thus dispelling the myth that the Mahatama did not consider cricket significant. In fact, here Gandhi is using a perceived issue in cricket to illustrate wider social schisms between religious groups in India. By presenting this through the lens of cricket, Gandhi impacts an perhaps untouched audience that may not have considered that brotherhood between all religious groups was critical for Indian independence.

Ultimately, Gandhi recognised the sociopolitical impact of cricket throughout the early 20th century and used it in an attempt to realise his conceptualisation of Indian independence. At times when legendary cricketers such as Baloo and Vithal were reshaping the caste system, Gandhi remained silent but looked upon cricket as a useful tool to further his message of equality among the classes. Yet, when cricket seemingly began to drive a deep division between religious groups, Gandhi had to step in. Through his public statement, he directly influenced those around him to boycott the game, not only indicating that communal divisions were not the way forward for the country but also spreading this message to a wider audience. In the eyes of Gandhi, the cricket green was a battleground for equality and Indian independence. 


## Section

Write normally.
